---
title: Seamless embedding and Single Sign On with OAuth
author: mvo
date: 2018-05-28 10:00
tags: cockpit
slug: sso-oauth
category: blog
comments: 'true'
---

If you have many machines, you might be using some central application
to manage them all behind a "single pane of glass", such as ManageIQ
or Foreman.

While a lot of things can be done to a machine from the outside,
sometimes it is best to just log into it and have a look around.  We
of course recommend Cockpit for that!

And indeed, both ManageIQ and Foreman have convenient links to open
Cockpit for a machine that is in their database.

But, you have just logged into your management pane which holds root
power over all your machines, and there shouldn't be any need to type
in your credentials for the individual machine again.

With ManageIQ, this is the case: It somehow manages to open Cockpit
seamlessly without any additional username and passwords.  Foreman
can't do this and puts on you on the login screen of Cockpit.

What's the difference and can we improve Foreman?

The difference is that ManageIQ uses a couple of Cockpit features like
OAuth and external authentication helpers, while Foreman 'just' has a
link to the Cockpit port of the machine.

I want Foreman to do seamless linking / embedding as well, and as a
first step, I have written down some details that I have figured out
so far as runnable code:

[https://github.com/mvollmer/seamless-cockpit](https://github.com/mvollmer/seamless-cockpit)

There is also a version with a reverse proxy which I think is
altogether much nicer, on the "nginxed" branch.  Unfortunately, we
need to fix a bug in Cockpit first before it will work:

[https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/pull/9237](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/pull/9237)

So, if have a management application for your machines and you want it
to seamlessly transfer the user into Cockpit, check out the repo
above!
